Finding high quality REITs in a volatile market

In the last post, we discussed about taking a long term view of this post-Brexit volatility and focusing on investing in quality companies. 

Since Brexit (24 June 2016), strong sponsor-backed REITs have outperformed their peers in what we described as a two speed market CapitaLand Mall Trust, CapitaLand Commercial Trust, and Mapletree Industrial Trust have seen their share price increase by 8%, 10% and 10% respectively, while Sabana REIT has dropped 4%, Viva Industrial Trust's share price has remain unchanged, and Cambridge Industrial Trust have seen a mild increase of 3% only.

For those who felt that they have "missed the boat", do not worry.  We believe the volatility in the market will persist as global investors try to make sense of the ramifications of Brexit and there should be opportunities to pick up good REITs at an attractive entry price in the months to come.

In this article, we will discuss 4 key factors underpinning good quality REITs which we believe will help the REIT's share price outperform it peers in a volatile and uncertain market.

1.  Strong sponsors - REIT with strong sponsors will tend to outperform REITs with weaker/no sponsors in the long run. Sponsors usually holds substantial ownership in the REIT, which provides a strong alignment of interest with investors.  Large sponsor stake also helps to reduce share price volatility (more retail investors tend to increase volatility as retail investors tend to take a shorter term view and buy/sell more often).  Further, REITs with strong sponsors will find it easier to raise financing (very important for property investing) and has cheaper financing cost.  For example both Mapletree Industrial Trust and CapitaLand Commercial Trust has average financing cost at 2.5%. Comparatively, Sabana REIT, Cambridge Industrial Trust and Viva Industrial Trust  has average financing costs of 4.2%, 3.6% and 4.1% respectively.

2.  Location - While this may seem obvious, it is often overlooked by REIT investors (Many REIT investors don't do their due diligence by walking around property.  Would you not if you are buying your own property?).  Investing in a REIT is very much like directly investing in any property.  We need to go back to the fundamentals of property investing, of which the most important is location.  Good locations are hard to come by, and is almost unique to every property.  Important areas to look at are the property's proximity to transport nodes (such as train stations and bus interchange), proximity to amenities (such as F&B areas or supermarkets), distances to main roads and expressways and quality of competing assets in the proximity.  Lets take the JCube and Westgate shopping malls as an example - Westgate is located directly next to the Jurong East MRT train station while JCube is situated less than 200 meters away from the train station.  While both malls are located in very close proximity of the train station, the success of the malls are vastly different between the two.  Westgate has much higher shopper traffic driven obviously by its closer proximity and connectivity to the train station. 

3.  Operations - We feel that this area should warrant a greater level of analysis for REIT investors.  The operations of a property is particularly important for certain type of assets such as shopping malls, hotels and logistics properties.  The success and efficiency of its operations is a key driver of the value of such property types (less so for offices, industrial facilities and residential units).  When investing in a retail REIT, important areas to consider for its shopping malls are its tenant mix, the brand positioning of the mall, and the ability of the asset manager to hold events or promotion to draw in the crowds.  Taking Westgate and Jem shopping malls as an example.  Both malls are located side by side, and both are next to and connected to the Jurong East MRT station.  However, JEM seems to have a slight edge over Westgate in terms of shopper traffic.  We believe that this is due to their mass market type tenant mix and brand profile (NTUC, Charles and Keith, Breadtalk, Delifrance) which appeals better to heartlanders in Jurong (Westgate has more upscale tenants and brands such as Isetan, Brozeit, Calvin Klein).  
  
4. Strong balance sheet - REITs with lower gearing and large debt headroom will enable them to act quickly on opportunities available, especially in weak markets.  Larger debt headroom also imply a reduced need to raise equity from investors for an acquisition (an equity raising event can be potentially dilutive for existing investors).  Another overlooked point is the amount of portfolio encumbrance, which have an impact on (future) financing costs and ability to borrow money.  For example, both Mapletree Industrial Trust and CapitaLand Commercial Trust has no encumbrance, on their portfolio providing them the financial flexibility when required while Cambridge Industrial Trust has 17.4% of their properties encumbered.

Its not that hard to identify good quality REITs.  All you need is a bit of research (and walking around the property).  As we mention in our previous post, the key is finding the right entry price for such good quality REITs, and we believe the volatile markets will provide investors the opportunity to accumulate such REITs in the months to come.

1.  Sponsors are usually the major shareholder of the REIT who in most cases have injected its own properties into the initial portfolio of the REIT at IPO.
2.  Encumbrance refers to pledging a property to the bank as collateral for borrowings

Disclaimer
The author may have positions or interests in the stocks mentioned in this article. These should not be viewed as recommendations; always do your own research before buying any stock.
